[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hi, it's James here
from "Food Matters."
And today, we're
going to be taking
a special spiritual discourse
into understanding more
about what it means
to live a deeply
compassionate, loving,
heart-centered and service-led
life with none other than
Sadhvi Bhagawatiji Saraswatiji.
>> Hello, Sadhvi.
>> It's wonderful to
be with you, James.
>> Likewise.
Your journey into
becoming a swami, per se,
is not a normal sort
of journey for most.
Can you explain to me the
sort of origins of your story
and how this began for you?
>> Sure.
Well, first of all,
it's really important
to realize that although there
is a story and there is a plot,
and I'm happy to share it
with you, that at the core
it's a story of grace.
And so as you hear it, realize
that what it is that's going on
is a heart and a
life that's being
cracked open to the presence
of more and more grace.
And that's really important
because people these days
think much more in terms
of I'm going to do it.
And actually, there's
this incredible power
in the universe, an incredible
intelligence in the universe,
a wisdom in the universe, an
energy in the universe that
is there for us.
And we just have to
open ourselves to it.
So I was 25.
I was in the midst of a
PhD program in psychology.
I had graduated from
Stanford, undergrad, and was
doing a PhD in psychology.
I was not consciously
seeking or searching,
which is incredibly embarrassing
to admit 23 years later, when
my ego would love to
say, since childhood
I was aware that there
must be something deeper.
And I was praying for it
and meditating upon it.
But that isn't my story.
I had no idea that
something else existed.
In this culture, in
this world, we're
really kind of
indoctrinated to believe
that a successful life
means get a good education,
get a good career,
make a lot of money,
look the right way
in the right clothes,
get invited to
the right parties,
vacation at the right
resorts, and boom, success.
And so I had those things.
I went to India with a
backpack because the person
I was traveling with
wanted to go to India.
So it wasn't even my choice.
It wasn't even that I woke
up one day and said India.
My typical vacation
spot was Europe.
But India, OK.
Well, I only even agreed
to go to India-- again,
as embarrassing because it
is almost 25 years later--
I only agreed to
go because I was
a staunch, staunch vegetarian.
I still am.
And trying to negotiate
broths, and sauces, and stocks,
and things like that
in languages you
don't speak, in restaurants
all over the world,
is very difficult. And so
when India was suggested,
the one thing I realized
was, well, at least
I'll be able to eat happily.
And on the airplane from
San Francisco to Delhi,
I had this moment in which I
realized this makes no sense.
This is crazy.
I'm flying halfway
around the world,
to a country I know
nothing about, that I'm not
interested in, only because
they know what vegetarian means.
I'm not going to
find that there is
chicken stock, or fish
sauce, or egg yolks,
or something in my food.
Well, that was true
in the Bay Area.
I already was living in a
place where that was true.
I didn't have to fly across
the world for a good vegetarian
meal.
So even though I was not
religious, I was raised Jewish,
and had and still have a
very deep cultural connection
to the Jewish people.
But it never was about God.
I never had any
connection with God.
awareness of God.
I never had any
relationship with God.
But I did have a
very deep belief
in what I used to call
the, capital P, Planner.
I was a scientist.
I had spent time in bio labs,
and chem labs, and stuff.
And you've got yourself
a Bunsen burner.
You've got yourself a crucible.
And nine times out of
10, nothing happens.
Sometimes you get a bad smell.
Sometimes you get some smoke.
But the idea that
somehow all of this
happened randomly, when
we couldn't recreate it
in a science lab knowing
everything we do,
didn't make sense to me.
So I always had faith that
there was a, capital P, Planner,
who understood the,
capital P, Plan.
I didn't understand
it, but that was OK.
And so when I was
on the airplane,
I thought this makes
no sense, which
means that there must be
a purpose that I'm just
not aware of.
Because I wasn't a wanderer.
I wasn't someone who just
kind of went somewhere
for no reason.
I was a doer.
And so I went through Stanford,
for example, undergrad in three
years, instead of four years.
And so if you're going
to do it, just do it.
So I wasn't the type
who just wandered.
So somewhere over the
Pacific I realized
there is a reason I'm going.
And I don't know it, which means
I need to keep my heart open.
And if I can't
keep my heart open,
I'm going to come
back to California
because even though I've taken
a semester off from my program,
there's still a lot of things I
could do that would be useful,
and beneficial, and not just
wandering around a country I
have no interest in.
So I have to keep my heart open.
And that proved to be the best
vow I've ever taken in my life
because about a weekish later--
we were in Delhi
a couple of days.
And I opened a guidebook in
Delhi, a big "Lonely Planet"
guidebook, and said,
Rishikesh, just like that.
It was close to Delhi.
I was a nature person.
There's mountains.
There's river, yoga classes.
It was close enough to Delhi
that we could go and sort
of plan out the rest
of the trip from there.
It seemed very nice, and
clean, and natural beauty.
So we go to Rishikesh
a couple of days later.
And of all the hotels
in Rishikesh-- now,
where our ashram
Parmarth Niketan is--
now there's lots of hotels.
But at that time, 23 years
ago, all of the hotels
were on the main downtown
side of Rishikesh
or up in the northern
part of Rishikesh,
called Lakshman Jhula.
Where our ashram is
there was only one hotel.
And that hotel was
called the Green Hotel.
And in Delhi, I had
chosen that hotel
because I was an ardent
environmentalist.
And it never occurred to me that
the hotel was named Green Hotel
just because its
walls were painted
this kind of pastely green.
But I thought Green
Hotel, OK, great.
And get to the
hotel, drop our bags.
And I said, I'm going to go
put my feet in the river.
I was hot.
I was tired.
Just-- I'm going to go
put my feet in the river.
And I go down.
And before my feet
even touched the water,
I looked out over
this river that's
sacred, that's the
Mother Goddess.
But I didn't know that.
I didn't even know
that at the time.
I just knew river.
And I stand there.
And I look out over the river.
And suddenly, in
that moment, it was
like a veil was ripped
off, not just my eyes,
but off of every way of knowing
that I had, off of every sense
organ, off of my brain, off of
my mind, off of my identity,
as though this veil
was just pulled off.
And suddenly I could see.
But not just with my eyes.
I could see you with
my entire being.
And what I saw I
was so beautiful.
And I burst into tears.
And nothing else mattered.
I mean, in that moment,
just suddenly nothing
else mattered, except being
here, with this sacred river,
in this extraordinary,
exquisite truth, of my oneness
with God, whom I had just beheld
with every sense that I have.
Not just outside of
me, but inside of me.
And there was no distinction
between the inside
and the outside.
And it was-- all I could
say for so long was just,
oh, my god, it's so beautiful.
Oh, my god, it's so beautiful.
And I didn't know how, or where,
or why, or in what capacity.
And it didn't matter.
I just knew I'm
meant to be here.
And about-- and
a few days later,
I discovered the ashram where
I live, Parmarth Niketan,
has an alternate way of getting
from the hotel to the river.
It was clean.
It was beautiful.
The alleyway was not
so clean and beautiful.
And the ashram was just
exquisite, and gardens,
and beautiful statues-- and
again, I didn't know anything--
but just beautiful statues
and beautiful gardens.
And I'm walking through one
day, just walking from the river
back to the hotel, to
go to the bathroom.
And I hear a voice.
And the voice says
you must stay here.
I look around because clearly
if there was a voice someone
spoke.
It wasn't a welling
up of intuition.
People ask, well, what was it?
Was it a felt sense?
No, it was a voice.
Was it your voice?
Well, of course, it was my
voice because as you'll find out
there was no one else.
But it didn't speak
like my voice.
It was a man's voice.
It was an externally
perceived voice.
So I turn around.
And there's no one.
And then I figure
out, all right, I
guess I didn't hear a voice.
And didn't think much of it.
And kept walking.
And about 30 seconds
later, I hear it again.
You must stay here.
And again, I turned around.
And there's no one.
Look, is somebody shouting
from a balcony somewhere?
No one.
Now, in my entire
frame of reference
I was not even someone
who read spiritual books
or went to discourses
about spiritual people.
My whole frame of reference
of people who heard voices
were schizophrenics
and Joan of Arc.
And so I was just about
to ignore it again,
when what was very clearly my
own voice kicked in, and said,
OK, you can do that.
You can just pretend that
you've not heard a voice.
That's OK.
We understand.
But what that means
is that you're not
keeping your heart open.
And this is-- I mean, I
have these conversations
with myself.
I've always been very, very
deeply committed to truth,
from childhood.
That was-- that was my core
tenet, truth at all costs.
And so my inner voice says very
clearly, all right, go ahead.
Pretend you didn't hear a voice.
No problem.
We get it.
And you're going to have to turn
around and get yourself back
to Delhi, to get yourself
back on a flight to America,
because you're not
keeping your heart open.
And that was the value talking.
So you can pretend you
didn't hear a voice.
But you're not going
to go back on your vow.
And I was in the midst of these
days of just spiritual ecstasy.
I didn't want to
go back to Delhi.
We'd just gotten here.
And so I thought, all
right, I just heard a voice.
And I look up.
And I see a sign that
says, "Office" in English.
And I walk in.
And I say, I want to stay here.
And it's a long story.
But the end of the story--
fast forward about a week.
I finally am able to meet the
president, the head of Parmarth
Niketan, who, because
I had been told
they had to meet the
president, in my mind,
my mental construct
was president
means a gentleman in a suit,
and tie, and a briefcase,
and a desk.
And I had no idea that the
person I was about to meet it
was an enlightened
holy man, a revered--
revered religious leader.
And so when I finally,
finally met Pujya Swamiji,
it was as though he
were the glue that
brought all of the different
pieces of the experiences
I'd been having over the
previous week together.
And suddenly it made sense.
Suddenly I realized,
oh, yeah, it's here.
It's under him.
It's doing this type of work,
schools, and women's programs,
and health care, and
environment, and this service,
in this extraordinary
spiritually
open ecstasy that
I'm supposed to be.
And so suddenly
it all made sense.
And that was-- September,
it'll be 23 years.
And it's just been--
it's been extraordinary.
But circling back to the
beginning, its grace.
I was not a meditator.
I was not a spiritual seeker.
I was not someone who was
praying to God for a guru
or for the light.
And what I love about that is
grace doesn't discriminate.
Grace isn't saying,
you're worthy, you're not.
Grace isn't keeping some kind
of a tally of how many hours
you've spent meditating, how
many lustful or greedy thoughts
you've had.
You know, we put everything
kind of into this Santa Claus
analogy, of Santa Claus
knows you've been good,
you've been bad.
There's kind of this list,
the good girls, the bad girls,
the good boys, the bad boys.
And so we do that spiritually.
But that's not how grace works.
All grace needs is an opening.
And so that's why I
say, it's not my story.
It's grace's story.
I got picked up
and carried there.
There's one more piece
though that's just
a fun part of the story.
That after I met Pujya Swamiji
for the first time, I told him
I wanted to stay.
I didn't tell them
I had heard a voice.
I just told him
I wanted to stay.
And he says to me, this is your
home, stay whenever you like.
He says, I'm going away again.
He had been out of town.
He said, I'm going
out of town again.
But I'll be back
in about a week.
He said, but in any
case, don't worry.
I'll tell them to give
you a room anytime.
No, sorry-- he said, I'll
be here for about a week.
And then I'm going
out of town again.
We were heading
to the mountains.
So he said no problem, go to
the mountains if you want.
Even if I'm not here by
the time you get back,
I'll tell them to
give you a room.
You're always welcome.
And so I walk out of his
meeting area thinking,
OK, we'll go to the mountains
and stay when we come back.
And I get to this point in
the central part of the ashram
where we have this hand pump,
which is how most of India
traditionally has
always operated.
We've got this big hand pump.
We also have running
water, of course.
But nonetheless, we have
this beautiful hand pump,
that people actually
come from dozens of miles
away from, to get that
pure, beautiful water.
And I was about to turn
to walk out of the ashram.
And suddenly my feet won't walk.
I mean, literally my feet
are stuck to the ground.
And it felt like I--
like I was crazy-glued
to the ground.
And so initially I
think, oh, my god, I've
got some kind of
horrible disease.
I mean, I've got tetanus.
I've got polio.
I've got something
that I was supposed
to be vaccinated against and
the vaccination didn't work.
And then I come down
and I realize, all
right, chances are
lethal diseases
don't come on like this.
You were sitting on the
ground, on the floor, talking
to Swamiji.
You're not used to
sitting on the floor
or maybe your feet
are just asleep.
And so I bend down and I start
kind of massaging my legs.
And there's no pins or
needles, no tingling.
I can feel them fully.
They just don't move.
And so I close my eyes, and
I was studying neurology
at the time.
And so I close my eyes.
And I'm literally
picturing motor neurons
and they're firing.
And, OK, the right side
of the brain, and the
left side of the body.
Nothing.
And now you have to
picture me standing right
in the middle of the ashram.
My arms are kind of flailing--
flailing around
to get me to move.
Nothing.
So at that moment, from the
back gardens of the ashram,
this group of kids comes tearing
down the ashram path, just
playing tag, or some Indian
version of some kids' racing
game.
And instinctively, I
move backwards just
to get out of the way.
And then I realized,
oh, great, I'm free.
I can move.
And I can't.
My legs will not move forward.
And I then think, like a
good scientist, well, OK,
so I've just moved backwards.
I can't move forwards.
It means I've contracted
some disease whereby
I can only walk backwards.
OK.
It had been sort of an
adventurous week anyway.
I decide I'll just spin around.
And I spin around.
And I'll walk out of
this ashram backwards.
So I spin around.
So now my back is
toward the exit
of the ashram, prepared to walk
backwards out of the ashram.
And my feet won't--
they won't move.
I cannot lift my
foot off the ground.
And I stop and I
realize, oh, my god, I
can't walk in that
direction at all,
not facing forward,
not facing backward.
But I had just moved
backwards, back
towards Swamiji's
room, when the kids had
come tearing around the bend.
And I was now facing
in that direction
because I had spun around.
And I thought, I wonder.
And I start walking
forward, no problem.
It wasn't whether I was facing
forward or facing backward.
It was whether I was trying
to walk out of the ashram
or stay in the ashram.
And so I walk back--
now no problem at all-- back
towards Pujya Swamiji's room.
And I walked back into the room.
Of course, it's full of people.
He's got open darshan going on.
I walked back in.
And I just stand in the doorway.
And he's meeting some people.
And after a few
moments, he looks up.
He doesn't look
surprised to see me,
maybe only three or four
minutes had passed anyway.
And I said to him, I think
I'm supposed to stay now.
And he says, welcome.
That was it.
>> And you stayed 23
years and counting.
>> I stayed 23
And I've taken official
vows of renunciation.
I took my vows of renunciation
in the year 2000, vows
of sannyas, been
officially ordained
into that beautiful
order of renunciation.
I've been so blessed to be
able to serve in so many ways
through Divine Shakti
Foundation, which
is a foundation dedicated
to women and children.
We provide free education,
vocational training,
health care in the villages,
empowerment programs.
I've been blessed to be able
to serve as president of that.
Our Global Interfaith
WASH Alliance,
which is the world's first
international alliance
of leaders of the major
religions coming together
for water sanitation
and hygiene--
and I serve as the
Secretary-General of that.
We're working with the
United Nations and so many
other partners to
bring about a world
where everyone has access to
safe and sufficient water,
sanitation, hygiene.
Because, did you know that
today more people are suffering
and dying due to lack of
clean water than due to all
forms of violence combined?
So we're very, very
active with that.
It's just been such
an incredible blessing
to be able to serve
in that way and to be
able to do so much
speaking, so much teaching.
And yet I'm acutely aware
that it isn't me teaching.
It's not me speaking.
I'm being used the same way that
this microphone is being used.
And so whether it's speaking
about women's rights
and equality in India or
with the United Nations;
or whether it's speaking
about spirituality. and peace,
and love, and all of the
components of a spiritual life;
whether it's
teaching meditation,
whatever aspect that
that teaching may take
or that speaking may
take, it's not me.
I'm a vehicle, a
vessel, through which
that which needs to be
spoken is being spoken,
when I can get out of the way.
That's the only time, it
works is when I can get my--
my preconstructed
ideas-- when I can
get my preconstructed ideas,
my ego, my, lower case s,
self out of the way,
so that grace can flow.
That's when it touches people.
It's not about some wisdom I'm
manufacturing on the inside.
It's about how
much I can get out
of the way, how clear
of a vessel I can be,
how empty of a vessel I
can be for Grace to flow.
As I said, there's a
wisdom in the universe.
And if I can be a clear
vessel for that wisdom
to use me to flow
through for others,
that's such an
incredible blessing
to be able to be used like that.
>> Amazing.
I can empathize with
this story in a way,
having spent some
time in ashrams.
But that is a very
unique one, nonetheless.
For you to stay so committed
for so long, is beautiful.
>> You know, here's the thing.
Everything we do in life we
do to make ourselves happy.
And I don't mean that
in a selfish way.
Sure, some of our vision of
happiness is very shallow.
I'm going to see a good movie.
I'm going to have a
chocolate ice cream cone.
I'm going to have
a one-night stand.
I'm going to steal
somebody else's thing.
So then I'll have more.
And then I'll be happy.
So it leads us,
sometimes in harmless,
sometimes in not so
harmless, directions.
But even those of us who
are more deeply grounded,
we're still doing
it to be happy.
So whether it's, I'm meditating
and praying, and doing seva,
I'm still ultimately
doing it for my happiness.
Here's how it looks
at the end of the day.
When I lie down to
go to sleep at night,
and I know that I have spent
that day doing something that
benefits others, I feel happy.
So it's still-- it's
still our own happiness.
It's just a much longer term,
more grounded and anchored,
vision and awareness of
happiness than a chocolate ice
cream cone, or stealing
something, or a movie,
or a pay raise.
But it's still because this
is what makes me happy.
And I mention that
because when you say,
oh, it's so great that
you've stayed committed,
and people say, oh,
you've left everything
as though I had made this noble
sacrifice of all of that which
is good in the
world, I've left that
behind for this very austere,
not good at all life,
because I'm somehow
of a qualitatively
different caliber of person.
And that's not true at all.
I make the exact same
decisions that everybody makes,
which is, what is it that's
going to make me happy?
I've learned to look at
a long-term happiness,
at a deep happiness, at a
pervasive happiness, rather
than a short-term surface
level, up and down happiness.
But for me, living in a place
in which people are committed
to a spiritual practice;
in which people are there
to be bathed and
steeped in spirituality;
in which what we offer
is spiritual anchoring,
spiritual grounding, spiritual
opening, oneness, connection,
love, truth; in
which we are serving,
providing children
with education,
providing women with
empowerment, and training,
and opportunities, providing
the sick with medical care;
working for the environment,
water, sanitation, hygiene,
disaster relief, all
of these programs,
well, it's not
because I've somehow
made a more noble choice.
It's that doing that
makes me feel good.
When I feel good, I'm happier.
And so I've stayed committed
because what I've realized
is that as far as
package deals of life go,
this is the package deal.
And that doesn't mean that
it's always super enjoyable.
It doesn't mean that
there aren't challenges.
It doesn't mean that the
spiritual path is not
one in which the darkest
aspects of who you are
pulled from within and
shoved in your own face.
It doesn't mean that
working in India is easy.
It doesn't mean being
celibate is easy.
It doesn't mean working 24/7,
365 days a year is easy.
But it means that looking at
the choices for life, looking
at all that I know,
all that I've seen,
l that I've experienced, this
is the choice that brings me
actually the greatest
amount of happiness,
the greatest amount of peace,
that is the most pervasive,
the most long lasting,
the deepest, hence I stay.
>> That's amazing.
This sense of experiencing
spiritual divinity
or having a
shaktipat experience,
or something like this, seems
distant for many people.
And I would argue
that in the West,
we live in what might crudely be
said a weird culture, Western,
educated, industrialized,
rich, and democratic.
>> Ah, thank you.
>> And as part of
living in that world,
we seem to have detached
ourselves from the spirit.
We're looking down
on our phones always.
We're not connecting
with others.
We're not open to receiving
messages or intuition.
How do you think
this type of living
is affecting humanity in this
way, potentially negative,
in a way that we're
being conditioned
to believe certain things?
And how can we be more open?
>> Hmm, beautiful question.
There was a man.
He goes to the doctors one day.
And he says doctor, there's
something very wrong with me.
My entire body hurts.
Whatever I touch, it hurts.
When I touch my head, it hurts.
When I touch my
stomach, it hurts.
When I touch my back, it hurts.
When I touch my knee, it hurts.
And the doctor is very confused
because usually people come
in with one complaint, either
a headache, or a stomach
ache, or a backache.
And this guy, everything hurts.
So he runs every
test and every scan.
And at the end, he calls
the guy in and he says,
so the good news
is there is nothing
wrong with your head, or
your back, or your stomach,
or your knee.
The bad news is your
finger is broke.
And because your finger is
broken, whatever you touch,
it hurts.
And I love that joke
because this to me
is the core of what's happening
to us in society today.
We have lost our connection.
We've lost our
connection to truth.
connection to spirit.
We've lost our
connection to source.
We've lost our connection to
the oneness of consciousness
that flows through us.
And so our lives hurt.
And we blame the stock market.
And we blame interest
rates and mortgage rates.
And we blame the traffic.
And we blame our weight.
And we blame our employers, and
our employees, or our spouses,
or our lack of spouse,
or our children,
or our lack of children,
or whatever it may be.
But ultimately, the
problem is that we're
moving through the world
with a broken connection,
like this guy's whole body hurt
because his finger was broken.
Well, we are moving through the
world with a broken connection.
And so it hurts.
And not only that, but
we are causing hurt.
So it's one thing
that we're hurting.
It's another thing
than then because I
hurt, because I feel
like a separate object,
because I am disconnected
from soul, spirit, source,
consciousness, love,
truth, oneness--
I'm living as an object.
I therefore see
you as an object.
Form connects to form,
content connects to content.
So, body connects to
body, soul to soul.
If I'm identifying
as body, if I'm
moving through the world
as separate object, body,
whether it's my mind, my role,
my job, my title, my weight,
my gender, my sexual
orientation, whatever aspect
of this that I'm rooted in this
identity, this is who I am--
or my current emotion,
anger frustration--
if I'm moving through the world
from that place, that's object.
That's body.
Even the emotional stuff,
it's chemistry and electricity
in my brain.
I'm then going to
respond to you as object.
There's separation between us.
One object over here, all this
huge chunk of empty space.
There's another object over
there, then some empty space.
Then the guy behind
the camera over there,
then empty space,
and grace over there.
So we're all separate.
And when I move through
the world like that,
I consume, and
consume, and consume.
And destroy, and destroy,
and destroy because the world
becomes an object.
And whether it's
women who get raped,
whether it's trees that are cut
down, whether it's rivers that
are being polluted,
whether it's women
and children in sweatshops
who are being oppressed,
whether it's our own children
we're beating or demeaning,
Whether it's the soil that
we're polluting from factories
because of our craving for
more, more, more, more, more,
whatever it may
be, as long as I'm
moving through the world as
separate, disconnected object,
not only am I going
to suffer, but I'm
going to bring about
suffering in the world
because it's so disconnected.
It's an object.
So an object can
only be two things.
Either you're something that's
going to be a benefit to me.
I can use you, to get ahead, or
for my own personal pleasure,
or whatever it may be, or you
are an obstacle on my path.
And so whether you
are a human being,
whether you are a tree,
whether you are a river,
either I'm going to use you
or I need to remove you.
In either case, I'm going to
bring about suffering for you.
So that disconnection
that we speak about
is the root of, not only
our own suffering, not only
the depression, and
suicide tendencies,
and the anxiety,
and the addictions,
and all of that that we
suffer from individually,
it's the root of terrorism.
It's the root of wars.
It's also the root of the
environmental destruction.
We feel so separate
from Mother Earth.
from future generations.
If someone said to you,
suffocate your child,
you're like, no way.
There is no amount of money you
could pay a parent to convince
them to suffocate their child.
And we are
contributing to a world
actively, in which
children of the future
will not have air to breathe,
will not have water to drink.
Well, if we're able
to do that when
we wouldn't be able to
suffocate our own child
or deprive our own
child of water,
it's only because we
feel separate from that.
We're unable to
see them as self.
And so this is where--
the word "yoga," or "yog,"
as it's literally pronounced
in Sanskrit, literally
means Union.
So when we talk about
yoga, the practice of yog,
it's not a union of
my nose to my knees
or a union of my
fingers to my toes.
Finally, I can touch the ground.
It's a union of the
self to the divine.
And it doesn't matter
what your religion; it
doesn't matter if you're
spiritual, but not religious;
it doesn't matter
if you're atheist,
as long as you are aware
that there is something
to you other than your body.
And if doubt that,
if you doubt that,
just ask yourself, well,
over the course of my life
how many times has
my body changed?
And we know scientifically,
every seven, eight,
nine years, every single cell
of my body has regenerated.
OK, so how many times
has that happened?
And the skin cells
are only a few days.
It's just my internal
organs that take longer.
But I've been saying "I," I've
been saying "me" my whole life.
There hasn't been any
disruption in the continuity
of my awareness of self.
So who is that self
that's not your body?
Who is that self that's not
your relationships, that's
not your title, that's
not your career?
Because you were
saying I long before
you had a title, or a
career, or that relationship.
You were saying
I long before you
were an alcoholic, or depressed,
or too fat, or too thin.
What's that I?
Who's that I?
And so as long as
we connect with--
if you don't want
to call it God,
call it spirit, call it
consciousness, call it love,
call it truth, call
it-- doesn't matter.
But the connection
with that, that exists,
that is who we are, the
truth of who we are,
and that pervades the universe,
that connection is actually
what will save us from
suffering in our lives.
And it's what will very
literally save our species.
The Earth doesn't
need us to save her.
The Earth is going to be alive.
She survived the Ice Age.
She survived everything.
She's going to survive
an age of fire.
We won't survive it.
And so that connection
to the Earth,
to the children, the
grandchildren, the future,
that connection is what
will save our species.
So whether you're talking
about personal depression,
personal addiction,
personal sense of misery,
or you're talking about
planetary destruction,
at the very core the answer is
the same, connection, oneness.
>> Beautiful.
Om Namah Shivaya.
>> Om Namah Shivaya.
>> Practically speaking,
how can people do this?
Some people find it so
difficult to adhere to
or to subscribe to
some of the practices.
Even meditation is
difficult for some people.
How can practically
people connect in?
How can they find more
oneness and more peace
because there's so many
modalities and so many
ideas out there?
Here's an app to calm your mind.
Here's tapping.
Here's this.
I love a lot of them.
What do you think are some of
the greatest ways that people
can connect in and experience
their own divinity and more
oneness?
>> At the end of the
day, you come home.
You're stressed.
You're tired.
You've had a busy day.
You get into a hot bathtub, OK.
Now what does that hot
bath tub feel like?
Oh, right.
Oh.
Now, what's the prerequisite
for the "ah" experience
of the bath?
What's required for that?
Think about it.
What do you need?
What's the only prerequisite to
be able to have a "ah" moment?
And, of course,
yes, we need water.
We know that.
The water needs to be
the right temperature.
It needs to be full.
What do we need to do for that?
You've got to take
off your clothes.
If you walk in from work or from
wherever you are in your shoes,
in your suit and
tie, in your top hat,
and you get into the most
beautiful, warm bubble bath,
and you want to
feel relaxed, you're
going to feel soggy, and
gross, and weighted down,
and horrendous.
So the bath is available.
The "ah" is available.
The only thing preventing
you from having it
is the weight of your clothes.
And this is the same with
our internal connection.
It's not about what
practice you use.
I mean, you could say, what's
the best way to get undressed?
Well, you know what?
It really doesn't matter,
whatever works for you.
Top to bottom,
inside out, you want
to unbutton it
two-handed, one-handed,
and have somebody else unbutton
you, it doesn't matter.
All that matters is you've
got to get those clothes off.
And in the same way, see--
connection is within me.
It is me.
It's not like learning
rocket science.
It's not something I have
to gain from outside.
It is who I am.
We're talking about
going back to self.
And so meditation
is extraordinary.
Prayer is extraordinarily.
Service, extraordinary.
On that level, I would recommend
a practice of all three
of those.
And I'll come back
to that in a moment.
But where we're
going is in the self.
And so the question, of
course, then becomes, well,
why can't I be like that now?
Why do I have to do anything?
Why meditate?
Why pray?
Why serve?
If it's me, why am I not able
to just live like that all
the time?
Because of all of that,
which is not self, hence
my clothes metaphor.
When you want that warm bath
for the soul, for the self,
for the body, you've just got to
take off your physical clothes.
If it's just your
body you want relaxed,
just the body you want
the warm bath for,
get off your physical clothes.
You've got it.
You've got your "ah" moment.
But when you want
it for the soul,
it's not about getting rid
of your physical clothes.
It's about removing all
of that which is not self,
that we have stuck on to
the self, ego, expectations,
attachment, fear, desires,
subconscious and unconscious
programming, identities,
personalities, histories.
If you're going
to hold onto that,
and you're not going
to let that go,
it doesn't matter what
form of meditation you do.
You're not going to be
able to experience it.
It's like getting into the
bathtub in your ski clothes.
Well, as I said, you can have
the best bath in the world.
You're not going to feel
relaxed because you've
got this heavy down jacket,
that's just getting heavier
by the minute as the
jacket soaks up the water.
So if I'm suffocated by all
of that which is not self,
I need to let it go.
And this is where meditation is
such an extraordinary practice.
It helps us to let
go of the not self.
It's not that
meditation brings God
or that meditation brings
peace and enlightenment.
Meditation removes that
which is keeping us
from seeing and living in the
divinity, the light, the joy,
the peace that is who we
are, the same way the clothes
keep you from enjoying the bath.
And another way to think about
it is the Sun is shining.
We're sitting in a dark room.
In that dark room we're
doing prayers for the Sun,
and Sun Salutations,
and Sun Mudras.
And we're yearning for the
Sun, when all we've got to do
is throw open those blinds.
So it's not about how
do I bring the Sun?
It's about how do I
throw open the blinds
and experience the
Sun that is there,
and that is actually who I am?
So whatever practice
helps you let
go of the attachment--
you know, I
think for me personally, I
think when I'm meditating,
I think of a piece of Velcro.
And so the top layer is kind
of this superficial level
existence.
The role that I play, the
relationships that I have,
the physical body that I
have, all of that, my history.
And the bottom part is the
truth of who I am, soul, spirit.
And most of us live with the
two of them stuck together
all the time.
We have wrapped up our
awareness of soul, self,
with how much money you
make, who you're married to,
whose parent you are,
whose child you are,
how much you weigh.
And meditation is this.
That's not a perfect analogy
because this, soul, spirit,
doesn't actually go
anywhere or become anything.
It just is.
But we'll call this the
awareness of soul, spirit.
So this isn't actually
the soul, spirit.
It's awareness of soul, spirit.
So where my awareness is
stuck in here, as I meditate
it drops, and it
drops, and it drops,
and it drops, and it drops.
And suddenly here I am, sitting
in an awareness of soul, spirit
that is dropped into the
ocean of the self, that's
no longer stuck to the role,
the identity, the title,
the external object.
And so that's the goal.
So, yes, meditation is
a fantastic technique.
Just do it, five minutes a day.
People who say I can't
meditate, well, then
just commit to sitting.
If somebody says to you
in five minutes a day,
you can have what you're
looking for in life,
really we wouldn't do it?
I mean, seriously?
We go to the gym.
We go to the grocery store.
We get on Facebook.
We go to work, obviously.
We do all of these things
to get what we want.
And then what we really need
for the heart, the awareness,
we don't do it.
So I would say commit
to just sitting.
Don't worry about
what's going to happen.
But make a commitment, I
will sit and I won't budge.
Because what happens to
most of us is we sit down.
And we say, all right, focus
on the breath, or your mantra,
whatever form of meditation
you're doing, or become aware.
And, of course, that's true.
It's the nature of the mind.
And instead of just allowing
the thoughts to breeze--
blow across our awareness--
and I always say,
if you were lying on your
back, looking up at the sky--
it's a blue sky day.
You've got some wispy clouds.
There's two ways of doing that.
One way is, a cloud
comes and you a see it.
And you hook your
attention into it.
And you follow it all
the way over there.
The other way is you keep
the awareness on the blue sky
in between the clouds.
And, yeah, I'm
focused on the sky.
And the clouds keep blowing.
And that's the way
that we meditate.
The clouds are our thoughts.
The clouds are distractions.
The clouds are my
itchy leg, or the smell
of my muffins baking
in the kitchen,
or the things that I have to do.
The blue sky is the
space between them.
And what happens for most
of us is a thought comes.
Ah, I can smell
the muffin baking.
And we jump on it.
God, that's smells really good.
And I hope the
muffins don't burn.
I know I set the timer properly.
But God, yeah, did I
really do it right?
I remember one
time when I was 11,
I thought I set the
timer for 10 minutes.
But it was actually 20 minutes.
And they burned.
And, oh, my god, I
was so embarrassed.
And my mom yelled at
me-- and god, muffins.
That's why I don't eat muffins.
I love croissants.
God, I remember we were--
we were in Paris, on
the Champs-Elysses.
And I had that croissant.
And why don't we go to Paris
this Christmas vacation?
So I went from a smell, a smell
that wafted into my awareness,
to suddenly planning my
Christmas vacation in Paris.
And I've gone
through my whole sort
of childhood psychology of how
I gave up muffins and started
liking croissants.
In the meantime, the
whole drama's there.
And then when we catch
ourselves planning the vacation,
most of us say, well, forget it.
I can't meditate.
This is stupid.
I've got a whole to-do list.
And we stand up and walk away.
And all you need to do is
just notice, oh, distracted.
Just bring it back.
And eventually what happens is
the space between the thoughts
gets longer.
And you don't end up
all the way in Paris
before you notice that you
have gotten distracted.
So you bring it back
a little bit faster.
And if seated meditation
is difficult for you
right now, begin with a walking
meditation, walk in nature.
Get your bare feet in the dirt.
Do it open-eyed.
Sit and watch the
flowing of a river.
Watch a candle flame,
whatever it may be.
There's no rule that says
meditation has to be seated,
with your eyes closed.
Watch a candle flame.
Watch a flowing river.
Walk through nature.
But the process
is the same, which
is, I'm anchored in the
space between the thoughts.
It's not my contemplation time.
It's not my self-analysis time.
Those are all great things.
I'm all in favor of analysis.
I'm all in favor of
insight and contemplation.
But it's not meditation.
Meditation is being grounded in
the space between the thoughts.
Service.
Service because-- but see, this
is where meditation and service
have to go together
because otherwise we
serve as the good
people doing good work.
I'm a humanitarian.
I'm a philanthropist.
I'm a karma yogi.
I'm going to do good work.
We've got Post-it notes
on our computer that
say practice one
random act of kindness
today, whatever it may be.
That's not the highest way.
It's still great.
If that's where you're at,
by all means keep doing it.
But also realize this isn't
the highest of where I'm going.
Ultimately, the goal is not
me over here serving you over
there, because, see,
we're still separate.
At least I'm not raping or
abusing you, or using you
or discarding you.
At least I'm helping you.
But we're still separate.
We're still two
different objects.
And ultimately the goal is, I
serve you because you are self.
If I trip and I fall--
this is my favorite example
about this-- if I trip
and I fall, and I injure
my right leg, my
left leg is going
to pick up the extra weight.
We call that limping.
No one had to say, oh, great,
wonderful, humanitarian left
leg.
Would you mind picking
up a little extra weight?
It does it automatically because
it knows the right leg is self.
And if I trip, and I fall,
and I injure my right leg,
week, after week, after week the
left leg is never going to say,
oh, forget it, like I'm done.
Pick up your own weight.
I did that last week
and the week before.
And if after tripping
and hurting my leg.
I come down with a cold, or a
flu, or a headache, or measles,
whatever it may be, my
body is not going to say,
you know what, forget it.
We did the leg injury.
We did the fever.
We did the headache.
But I'm not doing
measles, enough.
It's going to keep
responding to whatever
the need is because the
entire mechanism understands
we are self.
If a bee flew over and
stung me, immediately my arm
would go like this.
I would--
[RUBBING BEE STING]
It's self.
It's one.
And so that service
is of self to self.
And that's the highest
level, is I see me in you.
I see you in me.
I see the divine in
both, that sameness.
I'm looking at you over there.
But if I'm at my highest
level, it's me in there.
And my highest level of me is
not my identified role, me.
It's divinity.
So that same spirit in me,
there it is over there in you.
So, of course, I'm
going to serve,
the same way the left
leg serves the right leg.
But you don't have to wait
till you have that awareness
to serve as long
as you're serving,
you serve with that as the goal.
Instead of me feeling like
this great humanitarian,
can I understand
I'm serving self?
Instead of seeing you as the
recipient of what I'm giving,
can I see you as self?
And then that becomes a way.
>> Yes.
I think it's important because
people feel lacking direction.
And sometimes just going
out and serving others
can give you a
sense of direction
because it's just like,
wow, I've got a great life.
How lucky I am.
How dare I feel ungrateful,
or anxious, or depressed,
or worried.
And so just serving alone can
provide a sense of service
or crack that door open to
seeing oneness in the other.
But if you could
talk about that?
>> Sure.
So first of all, there's of--
a lot of baggage around
purpose these days.
And so many people come to us--
bereft people, with
what look like from
the outside, wonderful
lives, people
who are doing
meaningful work, engaged
in meaningful relationships.
And they'll come
and they'll say,
but I don't know my purpose.
And I feel like we're
getting really indoctrinated,
and to the point
where it's starting
to feel unhealthily so,
into this concept of,
you have one purpose.
And it's going to
be something grand,
and romantic, and never been
done before, and extraordinary.
And until and
unless you find it,
it doesn't matter
what else you do.
It's not enough because
it's not your purpose.
And that feels to me
like a tragic myth.
We don't come into this world
branded on the behind with,
CEO of this company,
president of that country,
world famous this, head of that.
We come into this world branded
with divine, branded with true,
love, wholeness,
completeness, consciousness.
And so this concept
of "find your purpose"
has driven us into
these holes of,
well, it has to be one thing.
And, of course, it
has to be something
that I will make a living,
as though somehow the market
place were created to
pay me for my purpose.
And as though it's
going to be grand,
and romantic, and extraordinary.
And this just isn't true at all.
And it feels like such a
tragic, insidious almost,
myth and indoctrination
into people.
Our purpose as human beings
here on Earth is to wake up.
That is why we are here.
According to the
spiritual tradition,
the Vedic, Hindu, Indian
the reason that we have a
human birth is to wake up.
It is said very beautifully
in a beautiful teaching.
Three things are most precious.
Number one, a human birth.
Number two, the quest for
learning and awakening.
Number three, the
presence of the holy ones.
Well, the presence of the
holy ones, number three
is in service of number two.
The presence of the
holy ones will give you
the blessings, the light,
the awareness, the energy,
the shaktipat to have that
awareness of who you are.
That's why we're
here, is to wake up.
That's our purpose.
And so whether that is done as a
window washer, or a mail clerk,
or the CEO of a company, or
the president of a country,
or a waitress, that's
not what's important.
But because we've got
these frames, that
have said that somehow my
purpose must be inextricably
linked with my job, we've
gotten ourselves really stuck.
I'll give you an example.
So even if we take it
to the individual level.
So, OK, all of our collective
purpose is to wake up
and to know who
we are, the truth
of our divinity, collective
purpose, universal purpose you
can say.
But then each of us, of course,
has our own individual Dharma,
we would say, path, purpose,
individually here on Earth,
that is dictated in many
ways by our skill sets,
by the opportunities
that we've been given,
by the family of origin
we've been born into.
Our whole karmic
package is there
for us to fulfill
our unique Dharma.
But, A, it's not
always romantic.
B, it's not always fun.
C, it's not always
extraordinary.
D, it's not always
going to be paid for.
So if you think,
for example, about--
in India, you drive
down the street.
And still to this
day on highways,
you'll see poor people on the
side of the road hammering
large rocks into small rocks,
smaller rocks into tiny rocks,
ultimately into
gravel whether that's
going to become the road--
that is plastered onto the road.
And it's still done manually.
You've got men and
women with hammers.
So really that guy or
that lady came onto Earth
to be a roadside rock hammerer?
No, that's not a purpose.
That's not a Dharma.
But if this guy gets it into his
head, oh, my god, what's my--
what's my purpose, he's
going to be all confused.
And why is he hammering rocks?
Because he's got
to feed his family.
Because that's the
only way he's got,
with zero education, zero
training, zero opportunity,
to put food on the table
to feed his family.
And why is he working overtime?
Because he wants to send
his daughter to school,
because nobody in their village
has ever educated a girl child.
But this guy, for
whatever reason,
has decided his daughter
is going to school.
She's not going to
beg on the road.
She's not going to hammer rocks.
She's going to go to school.
So he's going to work overtime.
Being the guy who's the
first man in the village
to send his daughter to
school, that's his Dharma.
That's his purpose, to
bring about now a wave
that he may not even know about.
Because it's not a nice life.
You don't have a real
long life expectancy
when that's how you live.
So maybe he doesn't
live very long.
Maybe he moves to another slum.
Maybe he has no idea now that
other men have started sending
their daughters to school.
So he may not even be
there to have any idea.
And he's not moving
through the world
thinking this is my Dharma.
I'm going to be the
guy in the village.
He just knows, I've got to
send my daughter to school.
So I'm going to
hammer those rocks.
And that's important to realize
because if he were looking
for his purpose in the
hammering of the rocks,
he'd be very frustrated.
And so in the same way, if
we are looking for our job
to be the fulfillment
of our purpose,
some people may be very
blessed, very lucky.
Great.
When they overlap,
nothing like it.
But if they don't, don't
want it, maybe your purpose
is to make beautiful music,
to make beautiful art,
to write beautiful poems.
But maybe at this moment
people aren't buying them.
OK, but that doesn't mean
it's not your purpose.
But what it may
mean is, you better
get a job as a waiter, or a
waitress, or a gas station
attendant, or whatever
it is, so that you've
got food on the table.
And don't feel badly.
Don't feel like somehow
that's beneath your purpose.
Because if you've
got a job that's
putting food on the
table and giving you
the free time that you
need to create the music,
to create the art
that is your purpose,
so that you can give
it away, so that you
don't have to create art that's
in line with what sellable,
so that you actually can
create the art of your heart
and give it away if
nobody wants to buy it--
because, see, you got this job
as a waitress or a receptionist
over here.
Nothing wrong with that.
But we're indoctrinating
people to believe, oh,
being that waitress is
beneath you because see
your purpose is to be the
artist or the musician.
And if it's really your
purpose, it'll pay.
And so either people give it
up because they tried for years
and it doesn't pay.
And then they decide,
well, it must not
be my purpose, which is
a tragedy because it's
depriving the world of
that art, of that music.
Or they continue to
starve because it
feels beneath them to take a
job that isn't their purpose.
And that is where
we get really stuck.
And so highest core level, your
purpose is just to wake up.
On an individual level,
do not expect that
how you put food on
the table is supposed
to be the embodiment of
your Dharma, your purpose,
your highest calling.
But also don't expect that that
highest calling is always fun.
Two quick examples on that,
one, a story and one scripture.
So the story is a saint.
A holy man is
bathing in the river.
And there's a scorpion
drowning in the river.
And the holy man picks up
the scorpion to save it,
and put it on the edge of the
river so it doesn't drown.
And as he picks it up,
the scorpion stings him.
And he flings his arm in pain.
And the scorpion drops
back down into the water.
And the man goes to pick it
up again because again it
starts to drown.
And again, as he picks it,
up the scorpion stings it.
And again, he howls in
pain and flings his hand.
And the scorpion
falls in the water.
And this drama goes
on for several times.
And a guy on the shore,
watching this whole episode,
says to the holy
man, Baba, forget it.
Let it drown.
It's a scorpion.
It's going to just
keep stinging you.
And the saints says, it
stings me because to sting
is its Dharma.
I save him because
to save is my Dharma.
And if he's not leaving
his Dharma, why should
I leave mine?
So it doesn't always feel good.
It's not always fun.
It's not always appreciated.
But it's our Dharma.
And the last piece on this
is from the "Bhagavad Gita,"
in which Lord Krishna is
explaining to Arjuna why
he has to fight this battle.
The "Bhagavad Gita"
begins with Arjuna saying,
I see my family members on the
other side of this battlefield.
Forget it.
Let them keep all the land.
I don't want to fight.
And Lord Krishna says to
him basically, not so fast.
This is your Dharma.
It's not about land.
It's not about a war.
It's about restoring
Dharma, restoring
integrity,
righteousness, in a land
where unrighteousness,
darkness, has taken over.
This battle must be
fought to restore Dharma.
And you are the guy whose Dharma
it is to fight this battle.
And I'm god.
So I'm telling you so.
Didn't feel good,
wasn't romantic,
wasn't fun, wasn't
what he wanted to do,
wasn't appreciated,
but was his Dharma.
And this is really
important because that's
the New Age media
paints purpose, Dharma,
as though somehow you're
going to find yourself
on the cover of a magazine,
when you figure out
what your purpose is.
And you actually live
it and fulfill it
because you're going
to be the most famous
that, the best this, the
richest that, the newest this.
Maybe sometimes.
Maybe some people, maybe
that's some people's Dharma.
But it's not--
not most people's.
And to really stay rooted
in, not the romance, not
the grandeur, not what's going
to feel good in the moment,
but what's in alignment
with the core of who I am.
Not what my Facebook feed
tells me I should be,
not what the paid advertisements
for self-development courses
that are trying to sell me
something are telling me
I shouldn't be.
But actually my core truth,
what is in alignment with that.
And to move forward with that.
And when we know who we are
we will know what to do.
The problem these days is,
we have no idea who we are.
So we have no idea what to do.
And we're trying to
make our identities.
We do it the opposite now.
We do something because our
Facebook feed says we should,
or the guy next door is, or the
lady in the cubicle over there
is, or somebody has
told me I should.
And then we base
an identity on it.
Oh, you do that.
Therefore, you are this person.
Well, that's why
we're miserable.
First, we need to
figure out who I am?
And again, I'm consciousness,
and truth, and love,
and divinity.
So at the core, the
most important aspect
is how do I move through
the world as that?
And then, OK, what
is my unique way
that that's going to manifest?
Maybe I'm a school teacher.
Maybe I'm the waitress, who
serves up smiles with muffins,
whatever I may be.
But that is all in the service
of that higher purpose, which
is to wake up.
And so not to get bogged down
in the title, in the prestige,
in the trappings.
But to just keep
staying rooted in,
is this an expression of
my highest truth, which
is love, which is light, which
is divinity, which is oneness?
Is this an expression
of that which
is sacred to me, my unique
expression of truth,
love, divinity,
sacredness here on Earth?
And if it is,
that's your purpose.
That's your Dharma.
>> Beautiful.
You've answered
all my questions.
I wanted to finish on
service and purpose.
[LAUGHTER]
So because we finished there,
I think we're finished.
Thank you so much for your time.
I appreciate that.
And that was a deeply
enlightening conversation.
And I'm very grateful
for the work that you do
and the service that you offer.
[MUSIC PLAYING]